Problem Statement
Every evolutionary AI system requires a heuristic, a scalar measure of quality that tells the system whether it is improving, stagnating, or degrading. In supervised learning, this is accuracy against labeled data. In game-playing reinforcement learning, this is the game score. In LLM inference orchestration, no such ground truth exists.
The system makes placement decisions: given a model, a workload profile, SLO requirements, and available GPU resources, it selects a configuration (tensor parallelism, pipeline parallelism, data parallelism, GPU type, engine settings) and deploys inference. Over time, it observes real performance, corrects its predictions, and aims to make better decisions. But what does “better” mean?
Why This Is Genuinely Hard
The difficulty arises from several intertwined properties of the problem that distinguish it from standard optimization settings.
No ground truth configuration. Nobody can tell you “the correct answer for Qwen-72B at 50 users on A100s is TP=4 PP=1 DP=2.” There is no oracle that knows the globally optimal config. You only discover what works by trying things, and the space is far too large to exhaustively search.
Context dependence. A configuration that is excellent for serving (low latency, moderate throughput, higher cost) is terrible for batch processing (where latency is irrelevant and throughput per dollar is everything). A config perfect at 10 concurrent users is wrong at 100 users. Two placements cannot be compared unless they serve essentially the same workload under the same resource constraints.
Metric entanglement. Everything we care about — throughput, latency, cost — is determined by the same underlying resource decisions. Throughput depends on GPUs. Cost depends on GPUs. Latency depends on GPUs and parallelism strategy. You cannot optimize one dimension without affecting the others. There is no single axis of “better.”
Beating the baseline is not convergence. If the system observes throughput of 5,000 tok/s when the performance database predicted 4,500 tok/s, has it found something great? Or was the perf DB measurement noisy? And even if the system is genuinely outperforming predictions, that does not mean this is the best possible config. A completely untried configuration might be 30% better. Outperforming predictions tells you the predictions were wrong, not that you have reached the optimum.
Core Challenge
Without a defined ground truth, the system has no way to know if it has converged, no way to measure improvement, and no principled way to decide when to explore versus exploit. Every other module in Koi depends on this heuristic being well-designed.


 
Key Insight: Normalize by What Was Possible
The way to cut through the entanglement is to never measure absolute performance. Instead, measure how close the system got to the best it could have achieved, given what it had to work with.
Consider an analogy. Two students take different exams. One scores 90/100 on an easy exam. The other scores 75/100 on a hard exam. Raw scores say student one is better. But if student one’s classmates averaged 95 and student two’s classmates averaged 50, student two extracted far more from a harder situation. Koi needs the same normalization.
“I achieved 3,000 tok/s” means nothing in isolation. “I achieved 3,000 tok/s and the physical ceiling for this hardware and model is 3,200 tok/s” means 94% efficiency — excellent. “I achieved 3,000 tok/s and the physical ceiling is 10,000 tok/s” means 30% efficiency — terrible, the system is wasting resources.
The Efficiency Frontier as Ground Truth Substitute
For any given workload context (specific model, load level, SLO requirements), there exists a theoretical Pareto frontier of tradeoffs between cost and performance. Every point on this frontier represents a configuration where you cannot improve one metric without worsening another. You cannot achieve lower cost without sacrificing some performance, and you cannot achieve better performance without spending more.
Configurations on the frontier are efficient. Configurations below the frontier are wasteful — there exists another configuration that is both cheaper and better (or equal on one dimension and strictly better on the other). The distance from a chosen configuration to the frontier is the system’s inefficiency.
The true frontier is never known exactly. But it can be estimated, and the estimate improves over time. The frontier is approximated by the best configurations observed so far across all placements for similar workloads. Every time the system discovers a configuration that dominates a previously frontier config, the frontier expands and the estimate of what is achievable improves.
The Efficiency Frontier
The frontier is Koi’s evolving estimate of what is achievable. The heuristic measures how close each placement gets to this frontier. The frontier itself expands as the system learns, automatically raising the bar for what counts as “good.”


 
The Placement Efficiency Score (PES)
For every placement decision, Koi computes a single scalar called the Placement Efficiency Score (PES). This score ranges from 0 to 1, where 1 means the placement was on the Pareto frontier (no known configuration is better on all dimensions) and 0 means the placement was maximally wasteful.
The PES has three components that capture fundamentally different aspects of what it means to be “better.”
Component 1: Cost Efficiency Ratio (CER)
CER answers the question: how close was the system’s cost to the cheapest configuration that would have met all SLOs?
For the workload that was just handled, the system looks across all configurations it has ever observed (in the performance database and in runtime data) for configs that meet the SLOs under similar load conditions. Among those SLO-meeting configs, it finds the cheapest. That is the reference cost — the best-known minimum cost for this class of workload.
CER = best_known_SLO_meeting_cost / actual_cost
 
If the cheapest known SLO-meeting configuration costs $10/hr and the system used a configuration costing $10/hr, CER = 1.0 — the optimum was found (as far as the system knows). If the system used a configuration costing $15/hr, CER = 0.67 — it overpaid by 50%.
This metric elegantly handles the entanglement problem. If the system uses more GPUs (higher throughput AND higher cost), the CER only rewards it if those extra GPUs were necessary to meet SLOs. Using 8 GPUs when 4 would meet SLOs gives a CER of 0.5 regardless of how impressive the throughput looks. The metric naturally captures the principle: do not overprovision.
Adaptation for Batch Workloads
For batch jobs where the constraint is a completion deadline rather than a latency SLO, CER adapts. The reference cost becomes the cheapest configuration that would have completed within the deadline. If the job could have finished with 8 A100s in 20 hours (cost $256) but the system used 16 A100s and finished in 10 hours (cost $256), CER = 1.0 — same total cost, both meet the deadline, equally efficient. But if the system used 16 H100s and finished in 5 hours (cost $400), CER = 256/400 = 0.64 — it overpaid for speed it did not need.
SLO Compliance Is Binary
A critical design decision: CER is zero when SLOs are violated, regardless of cost. The system cannot get credit for being cheap if it does not deliver. Missing a latency SLO or a batch deadline is a failure, and the heuristic must reflect this harshly. This prevents the optimizer from discovering that the cheapest configuration is “no GPUs at all” and provides a hard floor on acceptable performance.

 
Component 2: Physical Efficiency Ratio (PER)
PER answers the question: of the GPU capability that was allocated, how much was used productively?
This captures something CER misses. Two configurations might cost the same, but one might be well-matched to the workload (GPUs running at 80% utilization, doing useful work) while the other is poorly matched (GPUs at 40% utilization because the configuration created bottlenecks like pipeline bubbles, communication overhead, or scheduling inefficiencies that left hardware idle).
PER = actual_throughput / theoretical_peak_throughput
 
Theoretical peak throughput is computed from the analytical model — given the allocated compute capacity, memory bandwidth, and the model’s arithmetic intensity, what is the maximum possible throughput if everything were perfect (no communication overhead, no pipeline bubbles, no scheduling waste)? That is the roofline throughput.
PER = 0.85 means 85% of the hardware’s theoretical capability is being used. PER = 0.40 means 60% of GPU capability is wasted on overhead, bubbles, or poor configuration choices.
This metric exposes configuration quality independent of how many resources were allocated. A config with TP=4 PP=3 on a model that does not partition well into 3 pipeline stages will have low PER because of pipeline bubble waste. A config with TP=8 on a small model will have low PER because communication overhead dominates compute. The metric reveals these inefficiencies.
Component 3: Stability Score (SS)
SS answers the question: How well did the system get it right on the first attempt?
SS = time_in_final_config / total_job_time
 
If a job runs for 10 hours and the system selected the correct configuration from the start (no reconfigurations needed), SS = 1.0. If the job required a reconfiguration at hour 2 (with 15 minutes of downtime) and then ran successfully for 8 hours, SS = 480/600 = 0.97 — good but not perfect. If the job needed three reconfigurations with cumulative downtime and suboptimal running periods, SS might be 0.80.
This metric captures the system’s prediction quality. If the Oracle and LLM ensemble were perfect, every placement would be correct on the first attempt and SS would always be 1.0. Every reconfiguration represents a prediction failure — reality diverged from expectation enough to require correction. Over time, as the Oracle improves (CatBoost corrections tighten, performance database fills in), SS should trend toward 1.0.
SS also captures the cost of exploration. When the system deliberately tries an uncertain configuration (active exploration), SS will be lower for that job because there is a higher probability of needing correction. That is acceptable — exploration is an investment. But the system-wide average SS should still trend upward as exploration yields knowledge that improves future placements.

 
The Composite Score
The three components combine into a single weighted scalar:
PES = α × CER + β × PER + γ × SS
 
The weights differ by job type, reflecting the different priorities in each context:
Component
Serving Jobs
Batch Jobs
Rationale
α (Cost Efficiency)
0.40
0.50
Batch jobs have fixed workloads; cheaper is strictly better. Serving jobs balance cost with responsiveness.
β (Physical Efficiency)
0.30
0.35
Hardware utilization directly determines batch completion time. Still important for serving to avoid waste.
γ (Stability)
0.30
0.15
Reconfigurations disrupt serving traffic (dropped connections, KV cache loss). Batch jobs checkpoint and resume cheaply.

 
Interpretation Guide
PES Range
Interpretation
System Response
0.90 – 1.00
Excellent. Near Pareto-optimal placement.
Exploit known-good configs. Minimal exploration needed.
0.70 – 0.89
Good. Some inefficiency, likely from prediction error or conservative provisioning.
Analyze which component is low. Tighten Oracle corrections. Consider exploration.
0.50 – 0.69
Mediocre. Significant waste or multiple reconfigurations.
Investigate root cause. Oracle predictions may be poor for this workload class.
Below 0.50
Poor. Major misconfiguration, SLO violation, or cascading failures.
Trigger policy review. This workload class needs better perf DB coverage or LLM ensemble improvement.


 
The Expanding Frontier: How the Heuristic Evolves
The CER denominator (best known SLO-meeting cost) changes over time as the system discovers new configurations. This creates a dynamically tightening standard that prevents complacency.
Frontier Expansion Example
On day 1, the system only knows that Qwen-72B at 50 users meets SLOs on 8× A100 TP=4 DP=2 at $25.60/hr. Every placement is measured against this reference. Most placements achieve CER near 1.0 because the reference is loose.
On day 15, the exploration manager discovers that 4× H100 TP=4 DP=1 also meets SLOs at $16/hr. The reference cost drops from $25.60 to $16.00. Now historical placements that used 8× A100 retroactively look worse (CER drops from 1.0 to 16/25.60 = 0.625). The frontier has tightened.
On day 30, further exploration finds that 4× A100 TP=4 DP=1 meets SLOs at moderate load for only $6.40/hr. The reference drops again. The bar for “efficient” keeps rising.
Automatic Difficulty Scaling
Early in the system’s life, when few configurations are known, almost everything looks efficient because the frontier is loose. As more efficient configs are discovered, the frontier tightens and the bar for “good” rises. The system is graded on an increasingly hard curve, ensuring continuous improvement pressure.

 
Two Tracking Dimensions
Absolute PES: The current placement’s score against the current (tightest known) frontier. This might actually decrease over time as the frontier tightens — the system is being graded on a harder curve even as it improves.
Relative PES: The current placement’s score compared to the frontier as it was known at the time of placement. This should monotonically improve if the system is learning. It answers the question: “given what the system knew at the time, how well did it do?”
The gap between absolute and relative PES quantifies the value of exploration. A large gap means the system has discovered significantly better configs since the placement was made — knowledge that benefits all future placements.

 
Regret: The Bandit-Theoretic Interpretation
There is an elegant connection between PES and the formal concept of regret from multi-armed bandit theory. The per-decision regret is the difference between the outcome the system achieved and the outcome the best possible decision would have achieved:
regret(t) = actual_cost(t) - best_known_SLO_meeting_cost(t) × job_duration(t)
 
This is literally dollars wasted by not knowing the optimal configuration. Cumulative regret is the sum of all per-decision regret over the system’s lifetime.
R(T) = Σ regret(t)  for t = 1 to T
 
A system that is learning has sublinear cumulative regret — each new decision wastes less money than the previous one because the system knows more. The slope of the regret curve at any point is the system’s instantaneous inefficiency. When the slope approaches zero, the system has converged: it is finding near-optimal configurations consistently and there is little left to learn.
What the Regret Curve Reveals
Curve Shape
Interpretation
Action
Steep initial rise, then flattening
Healthy learning. System wasted money early (expected) and is converging.
Continue current strategy. Reduce exploration budget.
Linear growth (constant slope)
Not learning. Each decision is as wasteful as the last.
Check Oracle accuracy. Check policy memory retrieval. Increase exploration if frontier is stale.
Sudden jump after flat period
Environment changed (new model, new GPU type, vLLM update) and old knowledge is stale.
Reset exploration budget. Retrain CatBoost. Profile new configs for perf DB.
Near-zero slope from start
System is already near-optimal OR the frontier is too loose (not enough configs explored to tighten it).
Increase exploration to test whether the frontier can be tightened.


 
What “Better Than the Performance Database” Actually Means
A common question in the Koi design: if the system observes throughput of 5,000 tok/s and the performance database says 4,500 tok/s for this configuration, has the system found something great?
There are three possibilities, each with different implications:
Possibility 1: Measurement Conditions Differ
The performance database was benchmarked with different sequence lengths, different batch composition, or different system load. The numbers are not directly comparable. This is the most common case and it is not meaningful — it does not mean the system “beat” anything. The CatBoost correction model in Module 5 should learn this discrepancy and adjust future predictions accordingly.
Possibility 2: Benchmark Noise
Benchmarks have variance. Perhaps the performance database entry captured a slightly slow run. The current observation is just on the other side of the same distribution. Also not meaningful for the heuristic.
Possibility 3: Genuine Operational Difference
The system is running a newer version of vLLM with kernel optimizations. The GPU has better cooling and sustains higher clock speeds. The batch scheduler is forming better batches than the benchmark’s synthetic traffic. This is meaningful and should feed back into the Oracle via the CatBoost correction model.
Critical Principle
Beating the performance database is not the system’s goal. The PES does not reward outperforming predictions. It rewards finding the cheapest configuration that meets SLOs. If throughput exceeds predictions, that means the system has MORE headroom than expected — which means it might be able to use FEWER GPUs and save money. The correct response to “better than expected” is not celebration but “can I do this cheaper now?”

 
The PES captures this correctly. If the system achieves 5,000 tok/s instead of 4,500, and the SLO only requires 4,000, then PER increases (hardware is used more efficiently) but CER might actually decrease (the system could meet SLOs with cheaper hardware but is not doing so, meaning it is overpaying). The metric pushes toward the right response: exploit the headroom by reducing cost.

 
Exploration and Convergence
A high PES does not mean the system should stop exploring. Even at PES = 0.95 (near-optimal on all dimensions), continued exploration is warranted for three reasons.
The Frontier Is Estimated, Not Known
The system is at 0.95 relative to the best configurations it has seen. But there may exist an untried configuration that is 30% cheaper. The CER looks excellent because the denominator (best known cost) is loose. Exploration tightens the denominator, which either confirms the system is truly efficient or reveals that it is not.
The World Changes
New GPU types arrive. vLLM releases performance optimizations. New model architectures have different computational profiles. Every change potentially reshapes the Pareto frontier. Even if the system fully mapped the frontier for current hardware and software, the frontier shifts underneath it.
Diminishing but Never Zero Value
The exploration coefficient (β in the UCB acquisition function) decays over time but never reaches zero. The system always allocates a small fraction of decisions (2–5% as it matures) to exploration, catching frontier shifts and validating that known-good configurations remain optimal.
The signal to reduce exploration is when per-decision regret flattens — each new exploration yields little new information. But “little” is not “zero,” and the system must remain adaptive.

 
Worked Example: Batch Inference Placement
To make the PES concrete, consider a batch inference job for DeepSeek-V3 (671B MoE model) on 2 million rows. The system initially deployed on 12× A100 with TP=4 PP=3 (an unusual configuration forced by resource constraints), then reconfigured mid-job to 16× A100 with TP=8 PP=2 after throughput proved insufficient.
Initial Configuration Scoring
Component
Calculation
Score
CER
Config was failing to meet the 24-hour deadline. SLO violation = binary zero.
0.00
PER
Throughput was 1,650 tok/s. Roofline peak for 12× A100 was ~3,200 tok/s. Ratio: 1650/3200.
0.52
SS
Config was replaced after 2.5 hours; did not survive to completion.
0.00

 
PES_initial = 0.50 × 0.00 + 0.35 × 0.52 + 0.15 × 0.00 = 0.18
 
A score of 0.18 is poor. The TP=4 PP=3 configuration wasted nearly half the hardware on pipeline bubbles (low PER), failed to meet the deadline (zero CER), and required replacement (zero SS).
Post-Reconfiguration Scoring
Component
Calculation
Score
CER
16× A100 TP=8 PP=2 met the deadline. This IS the best known config. Ratio: 1.0.
1.00
PER
Throughput was 3,650 tok/s. Roofline peak for 16× A100 was ~4,200 tok/s. Ratio: 3650/4200.
0.87
SS
Ran 15 hours on final config out of 17.5 total hours. Ratio: 15/17.5.
0.86

 
PES_final = 0.50 × 1.00 + 0.35 × 0.87 + 0.15 × 0.86 = 0.93
 
A score of 0.93 is excellent for the post-correction phase.
Overall Job Score (Time-Weighted)
PES_job = (2.5 hrs × 0.18 + 15 hrs × 0.93) / 17.5 hrs = 0.82
 
The initial mistake drags down the overall score. The lesson for Module 5’s policy memory: the TP=4 PP=3 configuration is a poor choice for DeepSeek-V3. Next time, prefer TP=8 PP=2 when 16 GPUs are available.
Regret Computation
The hindsight-optimal approach was 16× A100 TP=8 PP=2 from the start, which would have cost approximately $307. The actual approach cost approximately $420 (including the wasted time on the initial suboptimal config). Per-job regret: $113. Next time a similar job arrives, the system will select TP=8 PP=2 immediately, and the regret for that job should be near zero. This is the regret curve flattening — the system is improving.
 
Koi tracks the following metrics over the system’s operational lifetime, each designed to demonstrate a different aspect of the system’s learning capability.
Primary: Cumulative Regret Curve
Plot total dollars wasted (sum of per-decision regret) over time. Demonstrate that regret is sublinear, proving the system learns. Compare against baselines: a static configuration (never adapts), random search over feasible configs, and a greedy controller without MPC lookahead. The gap between Koi’s regret curve and the baselines quantifies the value of the full system.
Component Trends Over Time
•   	CER trending upward: the system is finding cheaper SLO-meeting configurations over time.
•   	PER trending upward: the system is configuring hardware more efficiently, reducing waste from pipeline bubbles, communication overhead, and underutilization.
•   	SS trending upward: first-shot placements are getting better, and fewer reconfigurations are needed as predictions improve.
DB Accuracy Over Time
Prediction error (absolute residual between predicted and actual metrics) is trending downward as CatBoost accumulates data. This directly drives improvement in the other metrics — better predictions lead to better placements, which lead to higher PES.
Frontier Expansion Over Time
Track the number of Pareto-optimal configurations known and the area under the Pareto frontier. As exploration discovers new efficient configs, the frontier expands. The rate of expansion decreasing over time indicates the system is converging on the true frontier — diminishing returns from exploration.
Exploration Efficiency
Information gain per exploration decision, measured as the reduction in CatBoost prediction uncertainty averaged across the config space. Early explorations should yield high information gain (the system is learning rapidly). Later explorations yield less (the landscape is already well-mapped). The decay rate measures how efficiently the exploration manager targets the most informative configurations.

 
The Meta-Principle
What does it mean for Koi to be “better”? It means: for the same class of workload, the next placement wastes less money, uses hardware more efficiently, and gets it right on the first try more often.
The PES captures all three dimensions. The regret curve shows the trend. The Pareto frontier shows what “optimal” looks like, and it expands as the system learns.
There is no fixed ground truth. The ground truth is the frontier, and the frontier is alive — it grows with the system’s knowledge and shifts with the world. Koi’s job is to chase a moving target, and the PES measures how close it stays.
Summary
PES = α × CER + β × PER + γ × SS. CER measures cost efficiency (did we find the cheapest way?). PER measures hardware utilization (did we use GPUs well?). SS measures prediction quality (did we get it right the first time?). Together they provide a ground-truth-free, context-aware, dynamically tightening heuristic for evolutionary improvement in LLM inference orchestration.

 
 
End of Document

